This article reports on an effort to explore the differences
between two approaches to intuition and expertise that are
often viewed as conflicting: heuristics and biases (HB) and
naturalistic decision making (NDM). Starting from the
obvious fact that professional intuition is sometimes mar-
velous and sometimes flawed, the authors attempt to map
the boundary conditions that separate true intuitive skill
from overconfident and biased impressions. They conclude
that evaluating the likely quality of an intuitive judgment
requires an assessment of the predictability of the environ-
ment in which the judgment is made and of the individual’s
opportunity to learn the regularities of that environment.
Subjective experience is not a reliable indicator of judg-
ment accuracy.
Keywords: intuition, expertise, overconfidence, heuristics,
judgment
In this article we report on an effort to compare our
views on the issues of intuition and expertise and to
discuss the evidence for our respective positions. When
we launched this project, we expected to disagree on many
issues, and with good reason: One of us (GK) has spent
much of his career thinking about ways to promote reliance
on expert intuition in executive decision making and iden-
tifies himself as a member of the intellectual community of
scholars and practitioners who study naturalistic decision
making (NDM). The other (DK) has spent much of his
career running experiments in which intuitive judgment
was commonly found to be flawed; he is identified with the
“heuristics and biases” (HB) approach to the field.
A surprise awaited us when we got together to con-
sider our joint field of interest. We found ourselves agree-
ing most of the time. Where we initially disagreed, we were
usually able to converge upon a common position. Our
shared beliefs are much more specific than the common-
place that expert intuition is sometimes remarkably accu-
rate and sometimes off the mark. We accept the common-
place, of course, but we also have similar opinions about
more specific questions: What are the activities in which
skilled intuitive judgment develops with experience? What
are the activities in which experience is more likely to
produce overconfidence than genuine skill? Because we
largely agree about the answers to these questions we also
favor generally similar recommendations to organizations
seeking to improve the quality of judgments and decisions.
In spite of all this agreement, however, we find that we are
still separated in many ways: by divergent attitudes, pref-
erences about facts, and feelings about fighting words such
as “bias.” If we are to understand the differences between
our respective communities, such emotions must be taken
into account.
We begin with a brief review of the origins and
precursors of the NDM and HB approaches, followed by a
discussion of the most prominent points of contrast be-
tween them (NDM: Klein, Orasanu, Calderwood, & Zsam-
bok, 1993; HB: Gilovich, Griffin, & Kahneman, 2002;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). Next we present some claims
about the conditions under which skilled intuitions de-
velop, followed by several suggestions for ways to improve
the quality of judgments and choices